[WIP] Authorization section (#455)
wamp-proto/wamp-proto: rfc/text/advanced/ap_52_authorization.md

## Authorization {#authorization}

WAMP allows user services integrate seamlessly and enables *Clients* to perform *Actions*, namely

* **register** procedures on fully qualified URIs or URI patterns receiving invocations
* **call** procedures on (fully qualified) URIs
* **subscribe** to topics on fully qualified URIs or URI patterns receiving events
* **publish** events to (fully qualified) URIs

Doing so requires *Clients* to have an open *Session* to the same shared *Realm*.

A *Session* is established originating from a *Client* to a *Router*.

*Session*s MAY be required to *Authenticate* to a *Router* on a *Realm*.

*Authentication* lets the *Router* verify the identity of a *Session* often as a prerequisite to allowing access to resources in a *Realm*.

When the *Session* authenticates to a *Router* successfully, the *Router* will have established

* `realm|string`
* `authrole|string`
* `authid|string`

> _for_ that *Session* running _in_ that *Client*.

Author: the principal is determined for the session which is code that runs in the client

The triple `(realm, authrole, authid)` is called *Principal*, and the *Session* is authenticated under that *Principal*.

At any moment, there can be zero, one or many *Session*s with different `sessionid|int`s authenticated under the _same_ *Principal*.

> *Session*s MAY be required to *Authorize* to perform a specific *Action* on an URI or URI pattern in a *Realm*.

Reviewer: This where the term "endpoint" applies, btw. E.g.
> ...perform a specific *Action* on an endpoint specified by a URI...

Just a remark, I don't want to start a big debate over this. :grin:

> *Session*s MAY be required to *Authorize* to perform a specific *Action* on an URI or URI pattern in a *Realm*.

Author: You might be surprised, I highly value those discussions, even when they might seem nit picking!

Just a remark about my mental model:

* "perform action on URI or URI pattern" =>
* if action == call | publish => the URI must be fully qualified, and is matched by the broker against all current subscriptions, and for each matching subscription, the broker dispatches the published payload as an EVENT to the callees or subscribers on that registration or subscription, and each callee | subscriber is an XXX within a session with handling code attached in the app
* if action == register | subscribe => the URI can be fully qualified or pattern based. if successful, the respective registration | subscription is extended with the session

This distinction between *Authentication* and *Authorization* follows the established practice called "AAA":

> - **A**uthentication: Establishes who it is (**"subject"**)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A**uthentication: Establishes who it is (**"subject"**)
```

> - **A**uthorization: Decide in a *Realm* whether *Action* (**"operation"**) on URI or URI pattern (**"object"**) is allowed for the requesting *Principal* (**"subject"**)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A**uthorization: Decides within a *Realm* whether an *Action* (**"operation"**) on an URI or URI pattern (**"object"**) is allowed for the requesting *Principal* (**"subject"**)
```

> - **A**ccounting: Record for a *Realm* what *Action* (**"operation"**) on what URI or URI pattern (**"object"**) was requested by which *Principal* (**"subject"**), and was it allowed or denied?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A**ccounting: Records, for a *Realm*, what *Action* (**"operation"**) on what URI or URI pattern (**"object"**) was requested by which *Principal* (**"subject"**), and whether it was allowed or denied
```

> - **A**uditability: Record for a *Realm* what *Action* (**"operation"**) on what URI or URI pattern (**"object"**) was requested by which *Principal* (**"subject"**), and was it allowed or denied?

Reviewer 2: Hmm never heard this version of a last A. 
What I know is:
AAA = Authentication, Authorization, Accounting. 
Looking at google's search results for `AAA` — almost all links are about `Accounting`. 

Yeah, it is the same thing. But I think it is a more broadly used version. So mb rename `Auditability` → `Accounting`?

Author: I'll rename it. It seems to be more common with "accountability", even though it is wrong:

https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/accountability
https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/authentication_authorization_and_accounting

The third A is usually simply an "login log" (who sudo'ed what command and such).

I have never seen it implemented as "accountability" or "non-repudiation" - which exist, but not (usually) as part of AAA. Anyways, I'll change!
